So the final thing to take a look out is phantom references.
PhantomReference is probably the least used of all these types.
We've seen both weak reference and strong reference, when we
call the get method on the reference type,
we get back a strong reference to the underlying object.
However, PhantomReference does not work that way.
If we wrap a strong reference in a phantom reference and then called
get on the phantom reference, we get back null always. And you might
think that makes these things useless.
However, they do have a use case.
They are sometimes used as a replacement for finalize method.
Finalizers have certain issues.
For example,
finalizers can be expensive. When we add a finalizer to a class, when
that class is created, the garbage collector has to know about it
because the garbage collector has to able to call finalize once the
object is no longer reachable.
So this means that when such an object is created, there's some
code that runs to inform the garbage collector that we have an
object that's finalizable. There's a reference to that finalizable
object kept by the runtime,
so these objects will survive at least one garbage collection as the
runtime itself holds on to reference these things.
And then finally,
the runtime, at some point, must call the finalize method
before finally releasing the object, and this takes a lot of
work. So these things can be expensive.
We're also not really sure when the finalizer method is going to be called,
except that it will be called at some point in the future.
The idea behind phantom references is that we try and fix some of these
issues, and we'll see some code now that does that.
So again, we're going to use our Person class here,
but now we're going to create instances of this class and wrap them in a
PhantomReference. When we create a phantom reference, as we'll see, you must
associate a reference queue with a phantom reference.
So unlike soft references and weak references where
that's optional, with a phantom reference,
we must use a reference queue, so that's the first thing we'll do.
So here we're going to say ReferenceQueue of Person,
and we'll call this thing queue,
and then we'll make this equal to new ReferenceQueue of Person. And let's import
the class for that. So in a similar way to the way we used reference queues
previously, we'll do the same thing with our phantom reference. We'll create a
class that derives from PhantomReference.
So here, we'll have a class called FinalizePerson,
and this will extend PhantomReference of Person. Notice we
need to add a constructor to this class,
and this constructor takes a Person and the ReferenceQueue of Person. And again,
similar to our WeakReference class, we add a cleanup method to
this that's going to be called when there are no longer any
strong references to our Person type.
So we'll do things slightly differently this time.
Firstly, we'll create an ArrayList of FinalizePerson.
Call this thing list.
Make this equal to new ArrayList of FinalizePerson.
Then we need to import this class.
We'll also create an ArrayList of Person, and we call this thing people
and make this equal to again a new ArrayList of Person.
So what we'll do is create a number of person objects and add them to
the people list. For each person we create, we'll associate it with a
phantom reference, in this case a FinalizePerson. And we'll also
maintain a collection of those phantom references, and we'll see why we
are doing this in a moment.
So for the code, let's create 10 people.
So for int, our i = 0, i is less than 10, i++. We'll do
Person p = new Person people.add p,
and then we'll add a final adder to our list. So we'll do list.add
new FinalizePerson. Now our FinalizePerson takes a person reference
that's p and also a reference to the queue. So we'll add our queue
into this and add that into list.
So we now have a list full of people. What we can now do it set people
to be null and call System.gc. So at this point,
we've run the garbage collector.
We just run this thing once. And now everything that's on
that list will no longer be referenced.
Every phantom reference for each thing on that list will now have been added
to the reference queue we've associate with this thing.
So we can do two things here.
First of all,
we'll iterate over the list of phantom references and check that each
one of these things has been enqueued at this point.
So that code will look something like this.
And if we run this application,
we should see that at this point all our phantom references
have been enqueued, so let's try that.
If we look in the window here,
we see a list of true values printed out. There are no false
values here, so every phantom reference is being enqueued
when we first call System.gc.
Once we have that, we can then walk up to the reference queue
itself, retrieve each of the phantom references, and then execute
any code we want to inside that phantom reference. So the code for
that looks something like this.
So we poll the queue in the same way that we poll any reference
queue. We'll retrieve the object from the queue.
So while the poll doesn't return null,
we know we're getting objects back from the queue.
We cast it to be a type FinalizePerson,
and then we call its cleanup method. And if we run this code,
we should see a collection of true values printed out and then a
collection of person is finalizing resources printed out. And there we
go. We see all the trues followed by person is finalizing resources. The
way we normally write this code will be similar to the way we saw
reference queues in the previous example, i.e. we have the polling going
on in a background thread.
And the idea now is that we have more control over when finalization,
and again I'm doing air quotes here. We have more control over when
the final cleanup of this object happens.
It's not under the control of the garbage collector anymore. It's more under our control now.